---
title: February Revolution in Burma
author: We Resist - Burma
date: February 20, 2021
---

The shell of the old Burmese society has been breaking with the nationwide street protests against the military dictatorship since February 6 after the small group of Mandalay protesters had inflicted the spark. And, the decades-old military bureaucracy has been paralyzed since February 2 when the health-care workers had started the civil disobedience campaign. Later, the civil servants from the other state departments joined them.

The financial sectors are in collapse as well when the staff from the private and state-owned banks took part in the campaign, the people withdrew their saved money and are propagating not to pay any tax money to the military government. The decaying military dictatorship is moribund now and has the only resort to the oppressive apparatuses like the police forces, soldiers, and top-level bureaucrats in the civil administration.

Those phenomena of the people's struggles against the military dictatorship are not the new things anymore for the Burmese people. Those have happened in Burma just like the seasonal pattern. As the famous journalist and politician Hantharwaddy U Win Tin put it, the revolution in Burma would happen once in every decade as long as the military dictatorship prevails. The present nationwide struggles have been proving his words true and also reflecting the conflicts between the oppressor and the oppressed, the military-bureaucratic capitalist class and the whole people, which root could be found in the military-bureaucratic capitalism.

### 1. Military Bureaucratic Capitalism

Since the coup rehearsal of 1958, the military leaders had founded the military-owned businesses. They nationalized all industries in Burma after the 1962 coup in the name of the Burmese Way to Socialism. Actually, it is the imitation of the caricature of the Stalinist Socialism in Russia. As a result, the military bureaucratic caste emerged in the civil administration and economic planning. Democratic air had been choked for the people by the military bureaucratic centralization and one-party rule. It is no wonder socialism could not work from the top command alone by blocking the democratic inputs from the below, numerous labor and student strikes happened sporadically and were suppressed brutally, the economy was bankrupt, and the country finally became one of the least developed countries.

Against the backdrop, the students’ protest inflicted the spark in 1988 and the nationwide protests exploded the shell of the old society. The people from all corners of the country took part in the 88General Uprising under the banner of calling for the multi-party democratic system. The leaders of the mass movement and the intellectuals thought of finding the focal or influential person to lead and coordinate those nationwide general strikes.

The reductionist interpretation of the history- the axiom, “The Heroes Make the World”- seems to make them think the people could fight back the Japanese Fascists and gain the independence from the British colonials under the sole leadership of the national leader Aung San, so they thought of Aung San Su Kyi, the daughter of Aung San who had come back from England to take care of her sick mother, as the future national leader of the Burmese people. And then, the people came to accept her as their national leader and liberator, and the bourgeois presses and governments in the western countries who would like to cultivate their own jockey for capitalism praised her as the democratic icon.

From the beginning, ASSK is the opportunist and never revolutionary. She dare not challenge the state rule outright and had asked for the concessions like the interim government from the illegitimate military-appointed puppet, the famous Barrister Dr. Maung Maung’s government, although the old bureaucratic rule and civil administration had already been paralyzed and replaced by the democratic organs of the Township General Strike Committees. As a result, the precious time and the revolutionary tempo of the people had been wasted and under the opportunistic and reconciliatory leadership and the brutal crackdown of the military, the forces of the masses became dissipated.

Then, the military coup happened again and the top military leaders tried to transform their rule in another form by opening the capitalist economy, sold the state-owned enterprises and export-import permits in cheap prices to their close associates, the latter became the cronies, and the Burmese economy became dominated by the military conglomerates and their lackey cronies. Politically, they promised to draw the constitution and hold the election in the name of the discipline-flourishing democracy under the guidance of the military. In 2008, the military-drafted constitution was ratified in the so-called popular referendum.

In 2010, the founding of political parties was permitted and the election was held. The people including the NLD party boycotted the election and the Union Solidarity and Development Party (USDP) composed of the ex-military soldiers won it. Starting from 2012, the NLD party led by ASSK entered the by-election, and won the landslide victory in the 2015 general election. The so-called political analysts and think tanks funded by the western donors, and the so-called international community dominated by the representatives of the global capitalists praised Burma is now in democratic transition.

Actually, the economic and political base of the Burmese society has been never challenged and left untouched by the opportunist leader ASSK. The military-bureaucratic rule gave the people just the freedom of criticism while they still retained the freedom of violence and power, and continuously expanded their wealth by plugging with global capitalism, exploiting the workers, and grabbing the land of the peasants by force. It is no wonder ASSK and her party became the political representatives of the military-bureaucratic capitalism under the heavy weight of those classes’ economic and political power.

She even asked the people not to call the military lackeys as cronies but as tycoons to soften the public hatred towards their wealth accumulation within the framework of the military-dominated economy. Finally, she even defended outspokenly, in front of the international arena, the military leaders which had committed the genocide against the Rohingya people.

In the eyes of the military-bureaucratic capitalist class, the political representatives are no more than their employees. They could employ and fire them as they wish since the actual power base is not in the latter’s hands and does not count on the power of the people’s votes. The Commander-in-chief Min Aung Hlaing who has his own economic empire and under the charges of ICJ, would like to become a president to maintain his family interest and to protect himself from becoming the only lamb sacrificed in ICJ ritual on behalf of other military bureaucratic capitalists’ interests, after his retirement from the military post due to his age over the limit for the military officers. Then, he tried to extend his muscle to show who the real boss is, and took the military coup on February 1, 2021. All the employees of the military bureaucratic capitalist class, NLD leaders including ASSK, were arrested.

### 2. Middle Class: CDMers and RRMers

The next day after the military coup, the health-care workers especially the doctors initiated the civil disobedience campaigns (CDM), calling for the release of the elected leaders including the NLD leader ASSK, its government officials and representatives, and the restoration of the NLD government which had won the landslide victory in the 2020 general election within the political framework of the military-drafted 2008 constitution. Later, the other civil servants from the several state departments started the Red Ribbon Movement Campaign (RRM) and later joined the CDM under the same slogans.

Their slogans might be strange to our comrades in other countries since the workers and peasants suffered the same under the NLD government, not significantly different from the outright military rule. It is no wonder. Following the little bit of political and economic liberalizations to the international markets and donors, some jobs were created in the private economic sectors including the NGOs jobs, and mostly, the middle class got the benefits from those openings. The middle class hereby, I mean, according to their income, living standards, and job nature rather than according to the Marxian definition of the class.

And, the NLD government put a relatively significant emphasis on the health sector as well in the global pandemic period of Covid-19. And, the civil servants have a long history of hatred towards filling the administrative positions with the military personnel. For the middle class as long as the elections and civilian rule keep going under the military constitution, they seem to be satisfied with the gradual and minimal small changes they believe NLD government led by ASSK keeps trying to push on and would change the clauses in the constitution bit by bit which gives the power to the military in the parliament and some state departments.

At the beginning, their tactical movement was the non-cooperation with the military government and they refused to go to work. As usual, the middle class has the confused thought on politics and dare not take the risk to protest on the streets publicly. Expecting international pressure and intervention, they restrained each other to wait for 72 hours without taking any action on the streets. And, some even spread cheap thoughts that the military just temporarily retain the state power to check out the electoral voting fraud, then they would give back the state power to the NLD government, and that it would take the real coup if the people took to the streets, by claiming the country is in anarchy and so they have to take the coup in order to restore the law and order.

But no other powerful, influential person or groups of people could control the momentum of the coming class struggle arising out of the old decaying society ridden with many conflicts. Its crack has already been shown by the military coup and the cosmetic face of the old society has already been unmasked by arresting the NLD leader ASSK and elected government officials. Seeing the unmasked old face of the military bureaucratic capitalism in daytime, the working class and the progressive youth stepped forward to shatter the shell of the old society completely into pieces.

### 3. Working Class and Progressive Students

The working class never hesitates in the class struggle and always takes the leading role in resisting against the military dictatorship. It is true in every mass movement that has ever happened in Burma. After the small group of the student protest in Mandalay on February 5, thousands of workers from the Hlaing Thar Yar Township in Yangon marched in the center of Yangon City, by combining with the progressive youth from the Student Union on February 6. On the next day, the workers from the South Dagon Township joined the street protests, and some politicians and activists became involved in the movement as well.

After their outright challenge against the military coup, the protests spread all across the country including the ethnic people in the remote areas, with people increasing in number day by day. Even the ethnic people who had endured the sufferings and casualties in the wars and dehumanization in the genocidal attempts during the NLD rule came out to release the NLD leaders and restore the elected government. And, the workers and peasants who have faced suppression and imprisonment during the NLD rule joined the movement and chanted the same slogans as well.

### 4. Anonymous Revolutionaries and Impostors

It would be a false opinion if you would not have access to the facts of the real movement, who are leading those masses, and why the people are yearning for the NLD leaders who help in buttressing the military ruling class. Even the domestic media and exile broadcasting outlets could not explain those inner facts. For the reason of security to our comrades, I would like to explain those questions generally.

Actually, all the real bases from the Hlaing Thar Yar and South Dagon Townships, and the progressive youth forces have been led by our comrades who have tried for many years in organizing and struggling together with them. Those forces have numerous experiences of economic struggles in their industries, have the class solidarity and have already formed the democratic trade unions in their own factories for years. The other forces from the masses have followed them spontaneously out of their consensual hatred against the military dictatorship.

While our comrades have to play the low-profile roles due to the security reason, the opportunist former political activist and one of the leaders from the 88 generation, Ko Min Ko Naing, has been making empty interviews with the media by using his old political credits. In reality, he has no real popular base and no leading role in the daily mass movement. But I have to admit that since the Burmese people in the countryside have to struggle for their daily meals and have no time to study the daily political news, they only knew Ko Min Ko Naing after ASSK since they rely only on the radio for the political news. Thus, his political line of releasing the NLD leaders and the restoration of the NLD government under the 2008 constitution became the widespread slogans of the people.

And other opportunist youth from one political party which participated in 2020 general election within the political framework of the military-drafted constitution, lacking the real popular bases, joined the public march in front of our comrades-initiated mass movement, and pretended they are the real leaders of the masses in the domestic media and exile broadcasting outlets.

And, in line with the age-old historical interpretation, some exile Burmese politicians tried to find the focal or influential leader to lead and coordinate the nationwide masses, and then, those impostors are portrayed as the true leaders of the new generation. The workers felt disgraced due to their dishonesty and pretension. As a result, those impostors combined with the spontaneous movement of the masses around the country make their slogans overcome the revolutionary slogans of our solid working class movement.

But the political analyst should not be rash in concluding the Burmese people still admire or believe in ASSK. They would like to fight against the military dictatorship first and do not like to argue about the controversial matters that would disintegrate the solidarity of the people before the complete overthrow of the military dictatorship. One might call that is one of the Burmese cultural traits according to the saying, “All victories could be achieved with solidarity and unity.” They seem to place the problems with the NLD in the payroll that should be settled later among the people independent of military rule.

And, the people would like to combine those forces under the illusory image of their liberator, now the prisoner, ASSK. Ironically, the liberators become the prisoners and the prisoners become the liberators. As the progressive youth in Burma said, “No Supreme Saviour,” our comrades still keep marching together with the working class and progressive forces. The history and the coming struggles will absolve us.

### 5. CRPH

Our comrades might want to know how the NLD representatives responded to the military coup. On the day of the military coup, the soldiers had arrested the NLD government officials and some representatives. The remaining NLD representatives living in the state-owned compound, Naypyidaw, formed the Committee representing the representatives of the Pyithu Hluttaw (CRPH) or Lower Chamber on February 5.

Their statement claims that they are the legitimate representatives to call for the parliament and to establish the new government; the present government is not the legitimate government; and, the former NLD government officials led by the president of the NLD party, U Win Myint, is the only legitimate government until now. It is funny. They are in the situation of under house arrest in the state-owned compound and the legitimate government they recognize has already been arrested by the military junta. Even when they swore the oath of parliament to establish CRPH, they read the paragraph saying they would protect the military-drafted 2008 constitution.

They seem to follow the line of the ex-Prime Minister U Nu’s political stance during the 88 general uprising. At that time, U Nu claimed that General Ne Win who had taken the military coup in 1962 from the U Nu’s parliamentary government, is not legitimate; his government is the only legitimate one; so, he asked to transfer the state power to him. Since he lacked the popular base in the real mass movement in 1988, he could do nothing. His words were an empty threat in the competition of the class forces. To be said plainly, just like U Nu’s example, the present CRPH is nothing, just a paper tiger now.

The impostors from one political party asked the CRPH to expand the Committee by including the ethnic representatives and to form the provisional government. This proposal is nothing more than to ask the favor from the paper tiger to include them in the government under arrest since they had not won the 2020 general election and they have no true popular base in the movement. Nothing could save the NLD party and other ambitious political parties as long as they would like to go back under the military-drafted constitution. The chapter of NLD history might end like U Nu’s party in the parliamentary period. Constitutional or any legal solution to the problems of military bureaucratic capitalism is an illusory and weak weapon in the competition of the class forces and the class struggle.

### 6. Military Crackdowns

The military government has now the only resort to the oppressive apparatuses like the police forces, soldiers and top-level bureaucrats. The police started firing the protesters in Myawaddy on February 7. Some protesters were arrested and later released due to the pressure of the people.

Our comrades proposed and spread the pamphlets on that day to form the self-defense organization under the self-governing body in every village/tract which should disobey the authority of the Township General Administration and must obey the Township General Strike Committees. Around February 10, the police and authorities from the Township General Administration started night raids to pressure and arrest the CDMers and NLD representatives.

The opportunistic old leaders from the 88 generation followed a partial step from our pamphlet and asked to form the Village/Tract Protection Group to protect the CDMers and the security of the people. The only tactics they proposed is that the people should beat the pots and pans to frighten the night raiders who came in the villages/tracts.

We have repeatedly said it is not enough measure and the youth from the Self-defense Organization must form the small units composed of not more than five people in each unit whose duty is to disarm the weapons and communication materials of the night raiders and arm themselves for the coming street fighting when necessary. Later, the military government started using the soldiers for the night raids who do not hesitate to fire the real bullets everywhere. The tactics of the 88 generation are failing now.

On February 10, the riot police used the water cannons to disperse the protesters and fired among the masses. Myat Thet Thet Khaing, 19-year old girl, was shot dead like human hunting. On the night of February 14, the protesters in Myitkyina were shot by the riot police. The protesters in Mandalay were also shot by the riot police and soldiers as well. The real bullets, teargas and water cannons were used in dispersing and night raids. In Yangon city, the military tanks were stationed near the Central Bank starting from February 14.

### 7. What are the Next Steps?

The moribund dictatorship is in gasping and convulsion now by using their last resort of violent measures. At present, the CDMers from the middle class still stick to the illusion of non-violence and some of them are spreading or believing in the myth an army from the US or UN peace-keeping task force would come to save Burma and their only duty is to maintain the civil disobedience movement.

One leader from the 88 Generation, Ko Ko Gyi, is proposing he would take the duty of reconciliation and negotiation with the military leaders on behalf of the people. Those spineless people seem to think they could easily manipulate the people for their power-sharing and reconciliatory program with the dictatorship.

Their calculation doesn’t work. The people are now calling for the complete overthrow of the military bureaucratic capitalism in line with our policy, “Combating the three military (military businesses, military bureaucracy, and the old military structure), and Replacing with the Democratic Organs of the People Democracy.” And, the people also agree with our line of no-compromise with the military bureaucratic capitalists as well.

The next steps we are proposing now are to set up the Township General Strike Committees in every townships, to form the Self-defense Committees under the Self-governing Bodies of the Villages and Tracts, to implement disarming the oppressor’s apparatuses and arming our democratic organs by any means, to convene the National Congress with the elected representatives from each Township General Strike Committee and form the Provisional Revolutionary Government which would command the remaining police forces and soldiers loyal to the military dictatorship to drop down their weapons and obey the Provisional Revolutionary Government, and then to call for the people insurrection to crush the remaining people’s enemies.

### 8. No Supreme Saviour

To sum up, it is sure no one could bring back the Burmese people into the shell of the old military bureaucratic capitalist society and could contain the age-old conflicts within the old shell of the old society. And bourgeois democracy and global capitalism that encourages the reconciliation with the old society could not solve the age-old Burmese conflicts as well.

The only solution to those problems is to completely shatter the old society into pieces and burn them into ashes, and build the new democratic and socialist society which could serve the majority of the Burmese people including the peasants living in the widespread, rural lands and the workers in the major cities.

To strive for that, the only motto we have to remember in our mind, is the phrase from the International song, “No Supreme Saviour.”
